the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu all right today we start a
new section in advanced data structures
and it's data structures for memory
hierarchy so the idea here is is while
tradition almost all data structurers
think about uh memory as a flat thing
and in the ram model you've got a giant
array you can access the I element in
your giant array in constant time the
memory hierarchy you admit the reality
of almost all computers since I don't
know
80s uh with which have caches so the
idea is you have your CPU
connected with a very high bandwidth
channel to a relatively small cache
which is connected via a relatively
narrow bandwidth channel to a really big
memory and in in real computers this
keeps going you've got level one cache
then level two cache then level three
cache maybe then main memory then dis
then Network or whatever usually the
disc has a cache so you have this very
deep hierarchy which is typically
growing exponentially in size and also
growing exponentially in slowness in
latency so uh you like to design data
structures that most of the time are
working at the cache level because
that's really fast and as little as
possible you'd like to go to the deeper
levels so um we're going to Define two
models for working with memory
hierarchies uh the first model it's
called the external memory model
model it's also called the io
model and it's also called the disk
access model I think just so that it
could be called the dam
model uh I usually call it the external
memory model and this is sort of the
simplest model it's also the most well
studied I would say um and it's going to
relate closely to the other models that
we're going to look at and the idea with
the external memory model is yeah okay
uh real computer has many levels in this
hierarchy but let's just focus on the
last one and the next to last one
because typically uh that last one is
going to be way way slower than all the
others and so you really want to
minimize how many memory transfers
happen here so I want to count the
number of memory
transfers
between uh two levels and so this this
model just thinks about two levels I'll
call them cache and
dis we think of disk as infinite and
slow we think of cash as not only fast
but infinitely fast it takes zero time
to access access something in Cache all
we're thinking about is how many
transfers between the left and right
have to happen so computation here is
free access over here is free and we
just pay for this that's the external
memory model you can also think about
running time make sure running time is
still optimal and that will guarantee
this part's good but usually the hard
part is to minimize this part minimize
number of memory transfers now to make
this problem really
interesting uh we need
to add one more assumption and this is
also the case in practice that when you
request when you transfer an item from
disk to Cache you get not just that item
but entire block of items at the same
speed so in fact disk we're going to
think of is divided into
blocks block size
here is
B capital
B uh also over here caches are divided
into blocks of size
B and we have a limited number of
them uh we're going to suppose we have M
over
B uh cach lines they're usually called
at the cach level and so the total size
of the cach is m m stands for memory
sorry it's a little this this notation
is slightly confusing for historical
reasons but that's the way it is so B is
block size m is cach size total cache
size so there's M overb blocks of size B
dis has infinitely many blocks of size B
uh there's lots of motivations for this
uh basically you're the the main cost
you're paying here is latency you have
to send a request and then the request
the answer has to come back think of
that as the dis is far away from the CPU
and so it takes a long time to get there
for the request to get there and for the
data to get back so if you're sending
data back you might as well send it's
just as fast to send a lot of data as a
little bit of data in fact typically you
set this block size so that the amount
of T time it takes for the data to
arrive equals the latency to balance
those two costs with dis it's especially
the case because you have this latency
of moving the disc head once you move
the disc head you might as well read the
entire track the entire circle of that
if you're dealing with hard drives uh
you know it's just as fast once you once
the head gets
there okay so that's the model and so
now we want to minimize the number of
block memory transfers this happens and
the blocks make things a lot more
interesting because that means when you
read an item you really want to use all
the items right around it soon before it
gets kicked out of cach obviously cash
has limited size so when you bring
something in you've got to kick
something out that's the block
replacement strategy uh in the external
memory model you can do whatever you
want you have full control over this
cache uh
so let's see let me write some obvious
bounds and then I'll tell you some of
the main results in this
model so a number of memory transfers is
what we care about
and it's going to be at most the running
time on a
ram so this comparison between two
models right at most every operation you
do on a ram data structure uh incurs one
memory transfer that would be the worst
case so that's what we want to beat
there's also a lower
bound uh so this is also at least
uh the number of cell probes
divided by B I think we've talked
briefly about the cell probe model cell
probe I think in retroactive data
structures s probe model is uh this
model where all you count is uh you just
count how many words did I have to read
in order to do this data structure
operation so computation is free we just
count number of word reads from
memory so it's uh it's a lower bound on
RAM data structures and in in this model
we're only counting memory axises but
where cell probes you count word word
numbers here we're counting blocks and
so at best we can improve by a factor of
B so this is a lower bound this is an
upper bound so there's roughly a slop of
a factor of B here we want to do closer
to this bound than this bound this is
the obvious thing want to get down to
here whenever we can so let me give you
some examples of that
so sort of bunch of basic results in
this
model uh result
zero is
scanning so if I have an array of
items and I just want
to uh say add them all up or do a linear
scan to search for something thing
anything that involves accessing them in
order this will cost uh I guess ceiling
of n/
B if the array has size
n number of blocks in that array is
ceiling of n over B and so uh that's how
many block acces a cost so the the
annoying trick the annoying part here is
the the
ceiling okay uh if n is smaller than b
then this is not great I mean you have
to pay one memory read so it's optimal
but uh anyway that's scanning pretty
boring slightly more interesting
although not that much more interesting
is search
trees uh if you want to be able to
search for an item in this external
memory model what do you do in this
external memory model what do you do
be
trees conveniently named be trees uh we
want the block the branching factor of a
b
tree to be
B anything that's Theta B will do but
exactly B is great if you can read all
of these pointers and read all of these
key values if that fits in B then we're
happy
uh
so yeah typically we assume the
branching Factor here is like b +
one uh so in particular if B is one you
still have a branching factor of two
just to make it uh reasonable tree and
so now in a constant number of block
reads you can uh read all the data you
need to decide which child pointer You
Follow You Follow that child pointer and
so it takes uh log base b + 1 of
n to do a
search uh this is counting memory
transfers so this is not as big an
improvement here we improved by a factor
of B roughly here we're improving by a
factor of basically log
B uh so not as good as you might hope to
do dividing by B but it turns out this
is optimal you need
uh log base b + 1 of n to do a
search uh
in comparison
model in the same way you need log base
2 of n time to do a search In the
comparison model in this model you need
log base B of n let me talk a little bit
about the proof of
that it's a pretty simple information
theoretic
argument
so we prove this lower
bound uh the idea is the following you
want to figure out among n items
here where your item fits let's say it
fits right here so you want to know it's
between this element and this
element how many bits of information is
that well there's I guess n+ one
different outcomes of where your item
could fit if you allow it to exactly
match it's maybe twice that but this
there's Theta n uh options for your
answer and so if you take logs that is
uh log
n Bits of information
and this is how you normally show that
you need log n comparisons you need log
n comparisons because each comparison
could at most give you one bit of
information yes or no and there's login
bits to get so that's the lower bound on
binary search but now we're in this
model where we're not counting
comparisons even though we're in the
comparison model we're counting number
of block transfers so when I read in uh
some data I get B items from my array
or from
something so when I do a block
read all I can do in the comparison
model is compare my item to everything
that I read so you might as well compare
all of them but the information you
learn is only uh
log b +
one
bits cuz because what you learn is among
these B items where do I
fit and uh in the best case that is log
of B+ one uh bits of information it
could be worse if this uh if these guys
are not well distributed among your n
items it's most that and so you take the
ratio and you need uh
log n over log D + 1
uh block
reads okay and that's log base B+ one of
n Yeah question it
learn all right so the claim is in the
comparison model you compare your item
to everyone in here uh but um if your
array is
presorted then all you're learning is I
mean or information theoretically all
you're is where your item fits among
these B
items so uh there's you know order B
options where you fit and so only log uh
B bits of information
there okay this is you might consider
this a vague argument um you can do a
more formal version of it but I like the
information theoretic
perspective um cool so that's uh the
best thing you can do for search in this
model now you might also wonder about
insertions and deletions B trees support
insertions and deletions in log Bas B+
one of end time but that is not optimal
we can do
better so for
example uh if you want
to
sort right answer for
sorting is this crazy bound
n/ B which is really good that linear
time in this model Times log base M over
B of n / B this is a slight this is
roughly log base M of n uh the over BS
don't make too big a
difference um so this is an improvement
from normally sorting takes n log n but
the base 2 we're improving the base of
the log to M over b instead of two and
we're improving we're the overall
running time by factor of B so this is
actually a really big Improvement uh
we're we're going faster than the ram
time divided by
B Because to sort in the C prob model
just takes linear time you read all the
data you sort it put it back um so we
can't quite get n over B but we get this
log
Factor so this is really good and it's
something that would not result from
using be
trees this is a little funny because in
Reg regular Ram model if you do uh you
you insert everything into a balanced
binary search tree then do an in order
traversal that's an optimal sorting
algorithm it gives you n log n here it's
not optimal you throw everything into a
b tree you get n * log base B of n so
there's two things that are bad one is
that the base of the log is slightly off
uh it's B versus M over B that's not so
big a deal uh the big thing is it's n/ B
versus n
we don't want to pay n we want to pay n
over
B uh there's also a matching lower bound
In the comparison model which we will
not cover
here uh by next lecture we'll know how
to do sorting
optimally uh first I want to tell you
about about a bunch of
different uh ways or different problems
and
results so a funny
problem which actually does arise in
practice but it's interesting just to
think about uh instead of sorting
sorting is I give you an array I don't
know what order it's in you have to find
the right order and then put it into the
right order there's an easier problem
which is called permuting so I give you
an array I give you a permutation that
I'd like to do I just want you to move
the items
around so there's no you don't need to
do any comparisons to get get here uh I
tell you what the order is you just have
to physically move the items this is
harder than it sounds uh because when
you read it you read blocks of items in
the original order and so it's hard to
just do an arbitrary permutation uh and
there's two obvious algorithms one is
you could
sort uh your item so you could go to
every item in order and just write down
its uh desired number in the new
permutation write down the permutation
then run a sorting algorithm that will
take n B log base m b of n/ b or the
other obvious algorithm is to take the
first item put it where it belongs in
the array take the second item put it
where it belongs in the array and you
know new copy of the array and that will
take at most and memory
transfers each one a completely separate
memory transfer and the claim is the
optimal thing to do is the Min of those
two so you just check how does n and B
and M compare do the better of the two
algorithms
uh again there's a lower Bound in a
model called the indivisible model which
is assuming that each word of your of
your data doesn't get cut into subwords
so this is assuming as a lower bound
assuming your words do not get cut
up I believe it's still unsolved whether
you could do better
otherwise okay the last uh
result this model I wanted to talk about
is called buffer trees buffer trees are
pretty
cool they're essentially a dynamic
version of
sorting which is what we lack what B
trees do not give you
uh so they achieve the Sorting bound
divided by n per
operation uh so this is optimal I
haven't told you what the operations are
the bound is amortized it has to be
amortized because this bound is
typically little o of one think of this
as 1 over B there's a log Factor but
assuming that log factor is smaller than
b which is often the case this is an
order one over B it's a little low of
one cost which a little fun uh but of
course every real cost is an integer
it's an integer number of block
transfers so but amortised you can get a
little o one
bound uh and What it lets you
do is uh delayed queries and batch
updates
so I can do an insert and I can do a
delete I can do many of them and then I
can do a query against the current data
structure I want to know I don't know
the successor of an item but I don't get
the answer right then it's delayed uh
the query will sit there eventually the
data structure will decide to give me an
answer uh or it may just never give me
an answer but then there's a new
operation at the end which is flush
which is give me the answers to all the
questions that I asked and the flush
takes this much time so if you if you do
n operations and then say flush then it
doesn't take any extra time uh it's
going to cost one sort of pass through
the entire data structure one sorting
step
uh yeah the one thing you can get for
free is a zero cost um find
Min all right uh so buffer tree you can
do find men instantaneously it maintains
the men all the time so this lets you do
a priority cue you can do insert and
delete men in This Much Time
online and uh
the but if you want to do other kinds of
queries then uh they're slow to answer
they you get the answer much later okay
so this is a dynamic version of sorting
it lets you do sorting in particular
lets you do priority cues other great
things we will see uh not quite a buffer
tree but another data structure
achieving similar bounds in the next
lecture uh today's lecture is actually
going to be about be trees which seems
kind of boring because we already know
how to do be trees but we're going to do
them in another model which is the cast
biblus Cas oblivious model so let me
tell you about that model
all right so the cach oblivious model is
much newer uh it's from
1999 and uh it's from MIT originally uh
Charles lerson and his students invented
it uh back then in the context of 6046 I
believe uh and it's almost the same as
this external memory model
there's one change which is that the
algorithm doesn't know what b or M
is now this is both awkward and cool at
the same time so uh the assumption is
that the computer looks like this the
algorithm has no and the algorithm knows
that fact but it doesn't know uh what
the parameters of the cache are doesn't
know how the memory is blocked now as a
consequence it cannot manually say read
this block write this block it can't
decide which block to kick out this is
going to be more like a typical
algorithm I mean the algorithm will look
like a regular Ram algorithm it's going
to say read this word write this word to
memory uh you know do an addition
whatever uh
so algorithm
looks like a ram
algorithm but the analysis is going to
be
different so this is convenient because
algorithms I mean how you implement an
algorithm becomes much clearer in this
model and this is uh now we're going to
assume that the cache is maintained
automatically in particular the way that
blocks are
replaced becomes
automatic uh so the assumption is when
you read a word for memory the entire
block comes over you just don't know how
much data that is and when something
gets kicked out the entire block gets
kicked out and written to memory uh but
you don't get to see how that's
happening because you don't know
anything about b or M uh we're we need
to assume something about this
replacement strategy and in the cach
oblivious model we assume that it is
optimal uh this is an offline notion
saying what what we what block we're
going to kick out is the one that will
be used farthest in the future so this
is very hard to implement in practice
because you need a crystal ball but um
good news is uh you could use something
like lru least recently used kick that
guy out or even very simple algorithm uh
first in first out the most recent the
the oldest block that you brought in is
the one that you kick out uh these are
actually very close to
Optimal they're constant
competitive uh against or um given a
cache of twice the
size so this is from the early days of
competitive
analysis says if I compare offline
optimal with a cach for size m versus or
let's say offline optimal with a c for
size m/2 versus lru or fifo which are
online algorithms on a cach for size M
then this cost will be at most I think
twice this
cost uh now the good news is you look at
all these bounds you change M by a
factor of two nothing changes assuming
everything is at least some constant and
m and b are not super super close then
changing M by a factor of two doesn't
affect these bounds does these ones
don't even have m in them so it's not a
big
deal so we're going to assume this
basically for analysis it's not really
that big a deal you could also analyze
with these model with these models the
point is they're all the same within a
constant
factor for the algorithms we care
about uh what other fun things
um if you have a good cach oblivious
algorithm it's good simultaneously for
all B and M
that's the consequence so whereas B
trees for example need to know B they
need to have the right branching factor
for your value of B the cache oblivious
model you have to have your data
structure has to be correct has to be
optimized for all values of B and all
values of M
simultaneously so this has some nice
side effects uh in particular you
essentially
adapt to different values of B and M so
two nice side effects of that are that
if you have a multi-level memory
hierarchy each level has its own B and
its own M if you use a cache oblivious
algorithm and all of those caches are
maintained automatically using one of
these strategies then you you optimize
the number of maybe I should draw a
picture here's a multi-level memory
hierarchy you optimize the number of
memory transfers between these two
levels you optimize the number of memory
transfers between these two levels
between these two levels and between
these two levels so you optimize
everything each of them has some if you
just think of this as one big level
versus this level or versus all the
levels to the
right uh then that has some B and some M
and you're minimizing the number of
memory transfers
here uh also if B and M are
changing uh lots of situations for that
if you have multiple programs running at
the same time then your cache size might
effectively go down if they're really
running in parallel on the same computer
or you know pseudo
parallel uh block size could change if
you if you think of a disc and the block
size is the size of your track then
closer to the center the tracks are
smaller closer to the rim of the disc
then uh blocks are bigger all these
things basically in the cach oblivious
model you don't care because it will
just work now there's no nice
formalization of adapting to changing
values of BNN that's kind of an open
problem to make explicit what that means
well we're going to assume in the C
oblivious models you have one fixed B
one fixed M analyze relative to that but
of course that analysis applies
simultaneously to all B's and all M's
and so it's feels like you adapt
optimally whatever that
means uh in some sense the most
surprising thing about the cach
oblivious world is that it's possible
you can work in this model and get
basically all of these results
so let
me go over these
results so in the cach oblivious model
of course scans are still good scans
didn't assume anything about uh block
size here except in the analysis
scanning was just a sequential read uh
in general we can do a constant number
of
scans uh they some of them could go to
the left some of them could go to the
right some of them could be reading some
of them could be writing it's a general
form of scan but all of that will take
uh order n over B ceiling
okay
search this is what we're going to be
focused on
today you can
achieve order log base b + one of
n uh
search insert and
delete just like B trees but without
knowing what B is that's we're going to
do most of that
today uh what's next sorting sorting you
can do the same
bound that we'll see next
lecture
uh okay um next is
permuting uh here there's actually
negative result which is that you can't
do the
Min doesn't say exactly what you can do
um in particular we can certainly
permute as quickly as we can sort and we
can prute and we can achieve this Min in
a weird sense and that we can achieve n
and we can achieve the in Bound for
permutation in the cious model either
one but not both with a Min around them
because to know which one to apply you
need to know how B and M relate to n and
you don't here and so there's a lower
bound saying you really can't achieve
this bound even up to constant factors
uh but it doesn't explicitly say
anything more than
that uh so a little awkward fortunately
permuting isn't that big a deal I mean
and most of the time sorting the Sorting
bound is much faster than the N bound so
not so bad but uh slightly awkward so
there's some things you can't do this is
the first negative result on cach bvious
another fun negative result is actually
in search trees you might ask uh what is
this constant Factor here in front of
the log base B plus one of N and for B
trees uh the constant factor is
essentially
one uh you get 1 time log base B+ one of
n for uh in cach oblivious world you can
prove that one is
unattainable and the best possible
constant factor is log base 2 of e which
is like
1.44 uh so that is the right answer for
the constant today we'll get a constant
here of
four uh for this is for
search uh and but four has since been
improved to 1.44 so a tiny separation
there between cache oblivious and
external memory
um let's
see one more
thing uh continuing over
here is priority
Q cache oblivious
we can do in the optimal Time 1 over B
log base m/
B of n over
B only catch with that
result is that assume something called
The Tall cache assumption
see what I want to say
here we'll say m is uh
Omega uh B to the 1 +
Epsilon ugly looking
Omega uh certainly m is at least B if
you have one cache line you have m equal
B uh but we'd like M to be a little bit
bigger than b we'd like the cache to be
if M was at least b^ squared then the
height of the cache would be at least as
big as the width of the cache hence tall
cache but we don't even need m equal to
b s just m to the m equaling B to the
1.001 would be enough uh then you can
get this result and there's a theorem
that said shows for cache oblivious you
need to assume This Tall C Cas
assumption you cannot achieve this bound
without
it so uh but this is usually true for
real caches so life is
good all right so that's a quick summary
of cach obliv cach oblivious results any
questions about
those then we
proceed into
achieving search
trees log based B of ENT performance
cach obliviously make it interesting
because external memory we already know
how to do it with a B
tree so we did both models cashious be
trees What
Remain this was the first result in cach
oblivious data structures I'm going to
start with uh the static
problem cach
oblivious
static search
trees this was actually in an M thesis
here by Harold
procop so the idea is very simple uh we
can't use B trees because we don't know
what B is so we'll use binary search
trees those are those have served us
well so far so let's use a balanced
binary search tree and because it's
static might as well assume it's a
perfect balanced binary search tree so
let me draw one over here
uh try my favorite
one so how do you search in a uh binary
search tree uh binary search okay that's
our algorithm is fixed so the only
flexibility we have is how we map this
tree into the sequential order in memory
memory is a an array so for each of
these nodes we get to assign some order
some position in the array of memory and
then each of these child
pointers you know that changes where
they point
to and now cach obliviously you're going
to follow some root to Leaf path you
don't know which one all of
them you know are visiting nodes in some
order which looks pretty random
in the array of memory it's going to be
some
sequence like
this we would like the number of blocks
that contain those nodes to be
relatively
small
somehow so that's the the hard part now
you could try level order you could try
in order pre-order postorder all of them
fail the right order is something called
Venom deis
order so let's say there are n
nodes uh what we're going to do is carve
the
tree at the middle level of edges
[Applause]
so we have a tree like this we divide in
the middle leaves us with the top part
and many bottom
Parts there's going to be about square
root of n nodes in each of these little
triangles roughly speaking the number of
triangles down here is going to be
roughly Square < TK of n N I think I
have written here sare n + 1 it's a
little overestimate because I multiply
those two numbers it's bigger than n but
it's roughly that if there were root n
nodes up here then there would be sare
of n plus one children and square of N
plus1 Things down there so roughly root
n uh different things each of size root
n then what we do is
recursively lay out
those
triangles of size roughly Square Ro of
N and then
concatenate it's a very simple
idea let's apply it to this
tree so I split in the middle
level and I recursively lay out this
triangle up
here draw it as a box then I recursively
lay out this then I recursively lay out
this and this and this so up here uh I
mean to lay this out I would again split
in the middle level lay out this piece
so this guy will go first then this one
then this one now I'll go over and
recursively do this so it's four five
six then this one 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
15 that is the order in which I store
the nodes and I claim that's a good
order for example if B equals three this
looks really good because then all of
these nodes are in the first block and
so I get to choose which of these four
children trees I should look at I mean I
happen to go here and then maybe here I
look at those two nodes look at their
keys uh to decide oh I should go into
this
Branch but uh I only pay one memory
transfer to look at all those notes so
this this looks like a tree tuned for b
equals 3 but it turns out it's tuned for
all bees simultaneously if we do this
recursively it's hard to draw a a small
example where you see all the bees at
once but that's the best I can
do okay
let's analyze this
thing so the order of the nodes is clear
I didn't if you know what the vanon
deo's data structure is uh then you know
why it's called this otherwise see
lecture 10 or so in the future forget
exactly when we're covering it um so
this order was not invented by Venom
deos but it looks very similar to
something else that was invented by
fendo so we call it that but that's the
name of a guy Peter so um
analysis order is clear the algorithm is
clear we follow our root to Leaf path
what the what we claim is any root to
Leaf path uh and any value of B the
number of blocks visited is order log
base B of
n so to do that uh in the analysis we
get to know what B is the algorithm
didn't know algorithm here doesn't know
B and uh doesn't need to know B but to
analyze it to prove an order log base B
of n bound we need to
know what B is so the while the
algorithm recurses all the way
down uh you know keeps dividing these
blocks into smaller and smaller pieces
we're going to look at a particular
level of that
recursion I'm going to call that a a
level of detail
uh say I call it
straddling uh
B so my picture is going to be the
following these little triangles are
going to be size less than
b but these big triangles are size
greater than or equal to B
okay at some level of recursion that
happens by monotonicity I
guess I could keep going I mean this
this tree is going to have uh
substantial height I don't really know
how tall it is or that's sort of the the
central
question draw some pointers
here uh but just look at what if you
subdivide you subdivide all the big
triangles till you get to these small
triangles that are size less than b then
you stop recursing now the algorithm of
course will recursively lay that out but
what we know we recursively lay things
out then we concatenate meaning the
recursive layouts remain consecutive we
never like interl two layouts so
whatever however this thing is laid out
we don't really care because at that
point it's going to it's going to be
stored in in memory which is this giant
array it's going to be stored in an
interval of size less than
b so at worst uh where are the block
boundaries maybe draw that in
red block boundaries are size B we don't
know exactly how they're interspersed
but let's say these are the block
boundaries so it could be that this
little sub array falls into two blocks
but at most two
blocks so the little triangles of size
less than
b
uh
live in at most two memory
blocks so to visit each of these little
triangles we only spend two memory reads
at most
so all that's left is to count how many
of those little triangles do we need to
visit on a roote to Leaf
path I claim that's going to be log base
B of n uh so I guess the first question
is what is the
height of one of these little triangles
well we start with a tree of height log
n then we divide it in half and we
divide it in half and divide it in half
we take floors and ceilings whatever um
but we repeatedly divide the height in
half and we stop whenever the number of
nodes in there is less than b so that
means the height is going to be
Theta uh log B in fact it's going to be
in the range uh half log B to log
B probably with a pen that way doesn't
really
matter cuz you stop as soon as you hit B
uh you're dividing the height in half
repeatedly you might overshoot by at
most a half uh that's it so height is
log B so if we look along a root to Leaf
path each of these things we visit we
make a vertical progress log B Theta log
B and so and our total the total
vertical progress we need to make is log
n and so it's log n / log
B
so I guess four * log
n two log n over log
B
uh
triangles we reach a
leaf it's total progress we need to make
divided by half log B here progress per
triangle so we get 2 * log base B of N
and then for each triangle we have to
pay two memory reads so this implies uh
atmost
4 log base B of n memory
transfers and I implicitly assumed here
that b is not one otherwise need a B+
one here but to to be interesting as
long as B isn't one then it doesn't
matter okay so that's the log based bent
analysis actually really simple
essentially what we're doing here is
binary searching on
B in a kind of weird way uh using divide
and conquer and recursion so we say well
maybe B is the whole thing then we're b
equals n then we don't have to do
anything everything fits in a block
otherwise let's imagine dividing here
and supposing B is root n
and uh then we need two
axises uh so but that might B might be
smaller than that so we keep recursing
keep going down and because we're
dividing in half each time uh sorry
we're not biner searching on B we're
biner searching on log B which is the
the height of a tree with B nodes in it
and that's exactly what we can afford to
do and conveniently it's all we need to
do because to get log base B of n
correct you only need to get log B
correct up to a constant Factor
all
right now that was the easy part now the
hard part is to make this Dynamic this
is where things get exciting this works
fine for a static tree and this is how
we do search but we can't do inserts and
deletes in this world
easily uh but I'll show you how to do it
nonetheless
so this is what's called a cach
oblivious B
tree we're going to do it in uh five
steps and the first step unfortunately
is delayed till next lecture so I need a
black box it's uh a very useful black
box it's actually one that we've briefly
talked about
before I think in the time
travel if you remember in time travel
there was one black box which we still
haven't seen but we will do finally next
lecture uh which was you can insert into
a linked list and then given two items
in the link list know which one comes
before which other one in constant time
per
operation closely related to that is a
slightly different problem called order
file maintenance here's what it lets you
do you can store n elements n
words in specified order so just like
it's a linked
list but we don't store it as a linked
list we want to store it in an
array of linear
size uh so there's going to be some
blanks spots in this array got n items
an array of size say 2 N or 1.1 * n
anything like that will
suffice the rest we call them gaps items
gaps in the
array
and the updates so this is physically
what you have to do and you can change
uh this set of elements by either
deleting an
element or inserting an element between
to given
elements so this is just like the link
list updates I can delete somebody from
a link list I can insert a new item in
between two given items in the link list
but now it has to be stored in a
physical array of linear size now we
can't do this in constant time um but
what we can do
is
move elements around
okay so let me draw a picture
so maybe we have some elements
here uh they could be in sorted order
maybe
not there's some gaps in
between uh I didn't mention it but uh
all gaps will have constant
size so this will be constant side
gaps and we're able to do things like uh
insert a new item right after 42 let's
say we insert 12 so 12 we could put it
right here no problem now maybe we say
insert right after 42 the number six and
we're like uh there's no room to put six
so I've got to move some stuff maybe I
move 12 over here and then I put six
here and then I say okay now insert
right after 42 the number
seven and like
uhoh uh I could you know move these guys
over one and then put seven here and so
on okay obvious algorithm to do this
takes linear time linear number of
shifts in order to do one insertion
claim is you can do an insertion in log
squared
amortized it's pretty cool so worst case
you're still going to need to shift
everybody but just leaving constant size
gaps will be enough to reduce the
amortised cost the log squar and this is
conjectured optimal although no one
knows how to prove that and that's order
file maintenance now we're going to
assume this is a black box next lecture
we'll actually do
it but I want to first show you how it
lets us get cash oblivious Dynamic
berries log based B of n insert delete
search
okay we're going to use an ordered file
maintenance data structure to store our
keys just stick them in there now this
is good it's well it's really not good
for anything although it's a starting
point it can do updates in log squar of
n no I didn't mention this part uh in a
constant number of scans so I mean think
of these as this kind of shift I have to
scan left to right to copy 23 to the
left 42 to the left and so on uh scans
are things we know how to do fast in N
overb memory transfers so if you're
going to do log squared if you're going
to update an interval log squar guys
using constant number of scans this will
take uh log squar and over B memory
transfers
not quite the bound we want we want log
base B of n this could be larger or
smaller than log base P of n it depends
how Big B is uh but don't worry about it
for now okay this is still at Le at
least it's poog updates are kind of
vaguely decent we'll improve them later
on the other hand search is really bad
here I mean we're maintaining the items
I didn't mention it but we will actually
maintain the items in sorted order so
yeah you could do a binary search but
binary search is really bad cach
obliviously because most of the time
you'll be visiting a new block until the
very end uh so binary search fun
exercise is log n minus log B we want
log n divided by log B so we can't use
binary search we need to use Phantom
deis layouts this thing so we just plug
these together we take this static
search tree and stick it on top of an
ordered file maintenance data structure
so
here we have a van M debois layout
static
Tree on top
of this thing which is an ordered
file and we have cross
linking uh really um here we have gaps
and we don't store the gaps up here uh
do we yeah sure we do actually store
them all put put it all in there all
right I'm going to I have an actual
example
here let's do
it
three
slash 7
slash 16
42 okay uh cross links between I won't
draw all of them then we store all the
data up here as well
and then the internal nodes here are
going to store the max of the whole
subtree so here the max is three here
the max is 9
42 42
42 and
9 okay if I store the max of every
subtree then at the root if I want to
decide should I go left or should I go
right I look at the max of the left sub
tree and that will let me know whether I
should go left or right okay so now I
can do binary search I do a search up
here I want to do a search I search for
the tree this thing is laid out just
like this and so we pay uh log base B of
n to search up
here plus one if you want and then you
know we get to a key and we're done
that's all we wanted to know so search
is now good updates
uh two problems one is that update
updating just this bottom part is slow
second problem is if I change the bottom
thing and now I have to change the top
thing uh but let's look at that part
first it's not so bad to update I mean
this structure stays the same unless n
doubles then we rebuild the entire data
structure but basically this thing will
stay the same it's just data is moving
around in this array and we have to
update which values are stored in this
structure the layout of the structure
the order of the nodes that all stays
fixed it's just the numbers that are
being written in here that change that's
the cool
idea
so that's step two let's go to step
three actually kind of wanted that exact
picture it's okay
uh I need to specify how updates are
done so let's say I want to do an
insertion
uh if I want to insert a new key I
search for the key maybe if fits between
seven and nine uh then I do the
insertion in the bottom structure in the
ordered file so maybe you want to insert
eight uh these guys move around then I
have to propagate that information up
here and the key thing I want to specify
so an update does a
search then it updates the ordered
file that's going to take log squ n /
B and then we want to uh propagate
changes into the tree
in post
order post order
traversal that's the one thing I wanted
to
specify is it actually matters in what
order I update the items so for example
suppose I move nine to the right and
then I insert eight
here okay so then this thing Let's do
let's do it what changes in that
situation well nine will change to an
eight here which means this value has to
change to an eight and this value needs
to change to an
eight and this one I can't quite update
yet because I need to do the other tree
so here I change this value to uh
nine this one doesn't change so this is
okay this is okay this is okay just
taking the Maxes as I propagate up so
the red things are the nodes that I
touch and compute the Maxes of and the
order I did it was a postorder traversal
I need to do a post order traversal in
order to compute Maxes I need to know
what the max of this sub tree is and
this sub tree before I can recompute the
max of the
root okay so it's really the obvious
algorithm now the interesting part is
the
analysis so searches we've already
analyzed we don't need to do anything
there that's log base B of n
but updates are the interesting thing to
analyze and again we're going to look at
the level of
detail that straddles
b just like before
so let me draw bit of the
picture draw it slightly differently
from how I drew it last time
okay uh what I'm drawing here is
actually the bottom of the
tree so real tree is like this and I'm
looking at the the bottom where the
leaves are because I care about where I
connect to this ordered file F so
there's the order file at the
bottom I'm refining each triangle
recursively until their size less than b
they're going to be somewhere between
root B and B uh these big triangles are
bigger than
b
okay so that's where I want to look at
things now when we update in the ordered
file we have this theorem it says you
move elements in an interval so what
changes is an interval the interval has
size log squ n
amortised so we are
updating some interval
here maybe something like
this uh and so all of these
items change let's say now this is not
going to be too big it's going to be log
squ and
advertised uh and all of the ancestors
of those nodes have to be updated
potentially so you know all these guys
are going to get updated some of this
tree this path all of this stuff is
going to get updated some of this stuff
a path up to here the path up to the
root gets updated in general and all
these nodes get touched now I claim
that's cheap no more expensive than
updating down
here let's prove that
[Applause]
uh okay first first issue is in what
order do I visit the nodes here I want
to think about this post order okay
maybe I'll use another color draw that
so uh let's say we we start by updating
this guy you know we update this value
then we go I'm doing a postorder
traversal this tree once I've completely
finished here I can go up here maybe go
up here visit over down this way Vis you
know fix all the Maxes here then I go up
fix all the Maxes here up fix all the
Maxes so the Maxes when I come up then I
can fix the Maxes up here and so on okay
think about that order
if you just look at the big picture
which is which triangles are we visiting
what we do is we visit this triangle
then this one then this triangle then
this one then this triangle then this
one or in I guess this is the better
picture this triangle left one this
triangle next child this child this
parent next child this parent next child
and we're done we go over to the next
big triangle within a big triangle we
alternate between two small triangles as
long as we have four blocks of cash this
will be good because there's at most two
blocks for this little triangle at most
two blocks for this little triangle so
jumping back and forth between these is
basically
free so we
assume
uh white
chalk we assume that we have at least
four blocks of
cache uh post order traversal
alternates
between uh two little
triangles so this this part is free uh
the only issue is how many little
triangles do I need to load
overall uh sorry I should say I'm just
looking at the little triangles in the
bottom two
levels so this is
in the
bottom two
levels sorry I forgot to mention that as
soon as you go outside the bottom big
triangle uh let's not think about it yet
worry about that
later so just looking at these bottom
two levels that I drew we're just doing
this alternation and so the only issue
is how many little triangles do I have
to load so there could be uh these guys
um these guys are good because I'm
touching all these nodes and the number
of nodes here was bigger than b so if I
take if I take this divided by B and the
ceiling the ceiling doesn't hurt me
because the overall size is bigger than
b these guys I have to be a little bit
careful here the ceiling might hurt me
because I only read some of these nodes
it may be much less than b could be as
low as root B I divide by B take the
ceiling I get one so I I have to pay one
at the beginning one at the end but in
between I get to divide by
B so the number of
little triangles in the bottom two
levels that I visit is going to
be uh 1
+ log 2 N over B amortised the size of
the interval is log squ n amortised so
this would be if I'm perfect but I get a
plus one because of various ceilings
okay and also uh the number of blocks is
the
same because each of these little
triangles fits inside
a almost two blocks so it's going to be
order 1 plus log s n/
b okay so I can touch all those in this
much
time
because uh because I assume that I can
alternate between two of them quickly
and once I finish one of these Leaf
blocks I never touch it
again okay so I visit each block
essentially only
once as long as my cash is this
big cool so that deals with the bottom
two levels I claim the bottom two levels
would only pay this and we were already
paying that to update the ordered file
so it's no worse now there's the levels
above this one that we can't
see I claim that's also
okay uh sorry I'll need number of memory
transfers is equal to
that okay one more part of the
argument
levels above
the bottom
two nice thing about the levels above
the bottom two is there there aren't too
many
triangles all right well there aren't
too many nodes involved let's
see
so down here there were like log squared
n nodes that was a lot of nodes once I
go up two levels how many of these nodes
can there be these roots
well there's log squ n at the bottom and
then I basically shaved off a factor of
B here so the number of these roots is
at most log s n/
b that's
small for those nodes I could afford to
do an entire memory transfer for every
single
node okay so the number of
nodes that need updating those are
ancestors
is order log s n over B uh it's not
that's the number of leaves down there
at some point you reach the common
ancestor of those leaves that tree so
here draw a big
picture uh here's the
bottom bottom two
layers okay we're shaving that off
up
here uh the number of nodes here these
roots that we're dealing with that's the
log s n / B so if we build a tree on
those nodes total number of nodes in
here is only log s n/ b * 2 because it's
a binary tree but then there's also
these nodes up here this is potentially
log n
nodes so number of nodes that need
updating is it most this plus log
n okay so what's going on here is we we
first analyze the bottom two layers that
was okay because of this ordering thing
that we're only dealing with two
triangles at once and therefore we pay
this size divided by B log s n over B
then there's the common ancestors of
those nodes that forms a little binary
tree of size log s n / B for these nodes
this triangle up here we can afford to
pay one memory transfer for every node
so we don't care that we're efficient up
here uh which is I mean we may well
let's not worry about whether we are it
doesn't matter uh so for these nodes um
we pay at most one memory
transfer each and so we pay at most logw
n over B for them that's fine because
we're already paid that
much and finally we have to pay for
these nodes up here which are from the
common ancestors of these guys up to the
root that has length at most log n could
be smaller if this was a big
interval so for these
guys uh we
pay order log base B of
n why because this is a root to node
path and in this is the static analysis
we already know that following a root to
node path we pay at most log base B of n
okay so we pay log base B of n plus log
s n over B for this plus log squ n over
B for this plus log s n overb for the
ordered
file so overall running
time for an update is log base B of n
plus log 2 N / B we actually paid log
base B of n twice once to do the initial
search I said an update first has to
search for the key then it updates the
ordered file that's where we pay the
first log squ n/ B and then to propagate
all the changes up the tree we pay log
squ B for this part and then another log
base B of n for this
part okay that's updates with a bad
bound but we're all turns out we're
almost there so at this point we have
searches optimal because searches are
just searching through the Venom to Bose
thing that's log Bas B of n updates not
quite optimal uh I mean for not quite
matching a b tree I should say this is
not an optimal bound we're aiming for
we're just aiming for B trees uh we'd
want to get this bound same as
searching but we have this extra term
which would be as small for example if B
is log
n uh this term will be bigger than this
one the break point is when b equals log
n * log l again okay so for small B
we're not happy we want to be happy for
all B simultaneously so
want to fix this we're going to fix it
using a general
technique great
technique called IND Direction so this
is step
five IND
Direction idea is
simple we want to use previous the
previous data
structure on N over log n items
and what we need to store n items so
where do we put them on the bottom so
I'm going to have Theta log n nodes down
here Theta log n nodes next to
them or items I should
say Theta log
n okay and then one of these items let's
say the Min item gets stored in this
tree the mid item over here gets stored
in this tree the mid item here gets
up
here okay so this item only this the
data structure we just developed I only
store n over log n of the items the rest
are that fit in between those items are
stored down here now I use standard B
tree tricks actually uh if I if I want
to do an insertion okay how do I do a
search I follow root to Leaf path and
then I do a linear scan of this entire
structure how much does it cost to do a
linear scan of log n Only log n / B this
is smaller than log base B of n so the
hard part of search is the log base B of
n okay how do I do an update well first
I search for the guy I find the block
that it fits into and just insert into
that
block done as long as this block doesn't
get too big I can do how do I insert
into a block rewrite the entire Block
it's a scan it only takes log n over B
so it's basically free to rewrite this
entire block every time as long as it
has size at most log n if it gets too
full then I split it into two parts that
are half
full okay so in general each of these
blocks uh will maintain the size to be
between one4 log
n and log
n so if it gets bigger than log N I
split it into two guys of half size if
it gets smaller than one quarter log n
then I'll merge it with one of its
neighbors and then possibly have to
resplit it uh this or you could think of
it as stealing Neighbors from your
siblings that's what you do in B trees
but with a constant number of merges in
splits you can restore the property that
these guys have sizes very close to half
login and so if they end up getting full
that means you inserted half login items
if they ended up getting empty that
means you deleted half uh you deleted a
quarter login items and so in both cases
you have Logan items to charge to
whenever you do an update up here so we
update up here here every time we split
or merge down here because this guy has
to keep track of the blocks not the
items in the blocks so we effectively uh
slow
down the updates in the top
structure by a factor log
n which is great because we take this
update bound and we get to divide it by
log n which removes this
Square so we end up with
uh so we used to have log base B of n+
log 2 N / B we get to divide that by log
n uh plus we have to do uh this part at
the
bottom okay plus we're doing log n over
B at the bottom
so uh basically this log cancels with
this Square so this is log n overb as
well this thing gets even smaller so we
end up being able to do updates in log n
over
B not really though because at the
beginning we have to do a search to
figure out where to do the update if you
knew where you had to update you could
update a little faster you could update
in log n divided by B if you don't know
where to update you've got to spend log
base B ofn to search
initially okay but that's the fun part
we can now update this data structure
fast just with this one layer of IND
Direction with log n chunks at the
bottom speeding this data structure up
by factor of log n for updates searches
don't take any longer just pay this
extra term which is already much smaller
than what we were paying
before that's cach oblivious B trees
other than ordered file maintenance
which we'll do next class